.\" Manpage for qualbum.
.TH QUALBUM 1 "May 2026" "qualbum 0.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
qualbum \- generate a static photo gallery website
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B qualbum
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B qualbum
generates a static photo gallery from a directory tree of JPEG images and
Markdown captions in the current working directory. It produces gravity-cropped
thumbnails, gamma-correct Lanczos-3 previews, paginated gallery pages,
per-photo detail pages, and Atom feeds. Source JPEGs and other static assets
are hard-linked into the output tree.
.PP
The program is run from the gallery root \(em the directory that contains
.BR _config.yaml ,
the HTML/XML templates, and one or more album subdirectories. It walks every
non-hidden, non-underscore subdirectory looking for albums; an album is any
directory containing a
.B _gallery.yaml
file.
.PP
Thumbnails and previews are regenerated only when the source JPEG is newer
than the cached output (or always, under
.BR \-\-force ).
HTML and feeds are always re-emitted; they are cheap to write and depend on
the full set of photos.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-destination " " \fIDIR\fR
Write the generated site to
.IR DIR .
Overrides
.B destination
from
.BR _config.yaml .
Default:
.BR _site .
.TP
.BR \-j ", " \-\-jobs " " \fIN\fR
Use
.I N
worker threads for image resize. Default:
.B std::thread::hardware_concurrency()
(typically the number of CPU cores).
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force
Re-generate every thumbnail and preview JPEG, ignoring source mtimes. Useful
after changing
.B thumbsize
or
.BR previewsize ,
or after updating the resize code.
.TP
.BI \-\-config " FILE"
Read the site configuration from
.I FILE
instead of
.BR _config.yaml .
The destination is still resolved relative to the current working directory.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a short usage message and exit.
.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.B qualbum
loads
.B _config.yaml
(or the file passed to
.BR \-\-config )
at startup. The format is a flat YAML map; all keys are optional and have
the defaults shown.
.TP
.B title
Site title. Used in the
.B <title>
element and the Atom feed title.
Default: \fB"Qualbum"\fR.
.TP
.B author
Author name for feeds.
Default: \fB"Nobody"\fR.
.TP
.B baseurl
Absolute base URL of the deployed site, e.g.
.BR http://photo.example.com .
Used to build Atom
.B <id>
and
.B <link>
URLs.
Default: \fBhttp://example.com\fR.
.TP
.B prefix
URL path prefix, used when the site is deployed under a sub-path rather than
at the document root. Empty by default.
.TP
.B destination
Output directory. May be overridden with
.BR \-\-destination .
Default:
.BR _site .
.TP
.B thumbsize
Side length, in pixels, of the gravity-cropped square thumbnail.
Default:
.BR 300 .
.TP
.B previewsize
Longer-side cap, in pixels, of the aspect-preserving preview. Sources smaller
than this are not enlarged.
Default:
.BR 1200 .
.TP
.B pagemax
Photos per paginated gallery page.
Default:
.BR 48 .
.TP
.B force
If true, behave as if
.BR \-\-force
were passed on every invocation.
Default:
.BR false .
.PP
A typical
.B _config.yaml
looks like:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
title: "Kelsey Wellons Photography"
author: "Kelsey Wellons"
baseurl: "http://photo.nullprogram.com"
pagemax: 24
.fi
.RE
.
.SH "INPUT LAYOUT"
The gallery root must contain three template files and a config file, and may
contain any number of album subdirectories plus arbitrary static assets:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
.B _config.yaml          \fR# site config (see CONFIGURATION)
.B _gallery.html         \fR# template for paginated gallery pages
.B _single.html          \fR# template for per-photo pages
.B _feed.xml             \fR# template for Atom feeds
main.css              # any non-underscore, non-hidden files are
favicon.ico           # hard-linked into the output verbatim
.B birds/               \fR# an album
.B   _gallery.yaml      \fR#   per-album metadata (see below)
.B   heron01.jpg        \fR#   source image
.B   heron01.md         \fR#   caption + frontmatter (see below)
.B   heron02.jpg
.B   heron02.md
.B   ...
.B 2017/                \fR# albums may be nested arbitrarily
.B   07/sunflowers/
.B     _gallery.yaml
.B     ...
.fi
.RE
.PP
Subdirectories whose names begin with
.B .
or
.B _
are skipped during the walk (so
.BR _site/ ,
.BR .git/ ,
.BR .venv/ ,
and similar do not get ingested).
.SS Albums
A directory becomes an album by virtue of containing a
.B _gallery.yaml
file. The album's
.B _gallery.yaml
is a flat YAML map with these keys:
.TP
.B title
Album title, used for the album's gallery page and feed.
.TP
.B image
.IR (optional) .
Title of the photo to use as the album's cover on the
.B /albums/
index page. If absent, the oldest photo in the album is used.
.SS Photos
Each photo in an album is a pair of files: a JPEG and a Markdown sidecar with
matching base name. The Markdown file begins with a YAML frontmatter block
delimited by
.B ---
fences, followed by the photo's prose caption.
.PP
Example
.BR heron03.md :
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
---
title: "Great Blue Heron at sunset"
date: 2024-09-12T18:42:00\-04:00
f-stop: f/5.6
exposure-time: 1/250 sec
iso: ISO400
gravity: 60
---

A great blue heron fishing on the lake.  Patient bird;
he stood like this for almost an hour.

Lens \- AF-S DX NIKKOR 55-200mm f/4-5.6G VR II @ 200mm on Nikon D5500
.fi
.RE
.PP
Recognised frontmatter keys:
.TP
.B title
Photo title (required). Shown in the single-photo page header, gallery
thumbnail captions, and feed entries.
.TP
.B date
ISO 8601 timestamp with timezone (required). Used to sort photos within the
album (newest first) and to populate the
.B <time>
element on the single-photo page.
.TP
.BR f-stop ", " exposure-time ", " iso
Display strings, shown on the single-photo page below the title. Treated as
opaque text; any formatting is preserved.
.TP
.B gravity
Integer in
.BR 0\-100 ,
controlling where the square thumbnail crop is centred along the longer axis.
.B 50
centres the crop (default); lower values shift it left/up, higher values
right/down. Useful when the subject of a landscape photo isn't at dead centre.
.PP
The body of the
.B .md
file is rendered as Markdown into the single-photo page's
.B <div id="info">
and into the Atom feed
.B <content>
element. The supported subset is mistune 0.8.4-compatible: paragraphs,
.BR **bold** ,
.BR *italic* ,
inline
.BR `code` ,
.BR [text](url) ,
autolinks
.BR <http://...> ,
and hard line breaks (two trailing spaces).
.
.SH OUTPUT
Each run produces a tree under the destination directory:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
_site/index.html              # main gallery, all photos sorted by date desc
_site/2/index.html            # page 2 of the main gallery
_site/feed/index.xml          # main Atom feed
_site/albums/index.html       # one cover photo per album
_site/birds/index.html        # the "birds" album, page 1
_site/birds/2/index.html      # page 2 of the "birds" album
_site/birds/feed/index.xml    # per-album Atom feed
_site/birds/heron03/index.html# single-photo page
_site/birds/heron03/thumb.jpg # 300\(mu300 gravity-cropped thumbnail
_site/birds/heron03/preview.jpg# preview (longer side \(<=\fB previewsize\fR)
_site/birds/heron03.jpg       # hard link to source
_site/main.css                # hard-linked static assets
.fi
.RE
.PP
Pagination: gallery page 1 lives at
.IR album/index.html ;
subsequent pages live at
.IR album/N/index.html .
Feed links and pagination navigation are emitted accordingly.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Generate the site with defaults:
.B qualbum
.TP
Write into a staging directory and rebuild all images:
.B qualbum \-d /tmp/staging \-\-force
.TP
Use a single resize worker (for memory-tight machines or to leave cores free):
.B qualbum \-j 1
.
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
Site generated successfully.
.TP
.B 1
Runtime error during generation (invalid frontmatter, image read/write
failure, etc.). Diagnostic written to stderr.
.TP
.B 2
Invalid command-line arguments.
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B _config.yaml
Site configuration. See CONFIGURATION.
.TP
.B _gallery.html
HTML template used for paginated gallery pages. The generator targets elements
by id and class:
.BR title ,
.BR #title ,
.BR #gallery ,
.BR #prev ,
.BR #next ,
.BR .root-href .
.TP
.B _single.html
HTML template used for per-photo pages. Targets
.BR title ,
.BR #title ,
.BR #full ,
.BR #photo ,
.BR #prev ,
.BR #next ,
.BR .root-href ,
.BR time ,
.BR #f-stop ,
.BR #exposure-time ,
.BR #iso ,
.BR #info .
.TP
.B _feed.xml
Atom 1.0 feed template. Targets
.BR feed ,
.BR feed\ >\ id ,
.BR feed\ >\ updated ,
.BR feed\ link[rel=\(dqself\(dq] ,
.BR author\ name ,
.BR title .
.
.SH NOTES
.B qualbum
processes trusted input. The JPEG decoder (libjpeg-turbo) and YAML subset
parser do minimal validation; malformed input may cause the generator to
abort rather than fail gracefully.
.PP
Image scaling is gamma-correct: sources are linearised through the IEC
61966-2-1 sRGB transfer function, downsampled with separable Lanczos-3, and
re-encoded to sRGB. The placeholder background colour shown while a preview
loads is the gamma-correct mean of the preview's pixels.
.
